Today I feel like it's almost like do
progressives like themselves,
>> right? Like
>> you really want to put them on the
couch.
>> Well, well, I I mean I'm I'm
>> But the answer is no.
>> The answer is no. Well, right. No, and
in a way that's always that's always
been true, right? Nothing nothing like a
self-hating liberal, right?
>> This week I'm joined by my colleague
Ezra Klene. Ezra, welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> You're very welcome.
>> Sitting on this side of the table is
unnerving for me. It changes the
experience.
>> Yeah. It's like being on the wrong side
of the bed at home.
>> It's Listen, you know, it's a
gamechanging experience, but you will be
you will be better for it. So, we're
talking uh in the week after the
assassination of Charlie Kirk and we're
talking the day after the vice president
of the United States uh hosting Kirk's
show gave a kind of impassioned speech
about how he thinks that the American
left is more likely to either excuse
violence or delight in the deaths of its
political enemies than the right. we
have to talk about this incredibly
destructive movement of left-wing
extremism that has grown up over the
last few years. And I'm not sure that's
the right way of looking at this moment.
But it connects to something that I do
think which is that there is a problem
of
pessimism and despair
from my perspective on the American left
right now that hasn't been there to the
same extent for most of my life and
career. So, I'm wondering if you see it
that way. If you see a lot of
progressive despair out there.
>> I think that
there has been a
yeah a a kind of evaporation
of a bright horizon
in liberal thought in a lot of left
thought. I think that it has become
about averting different kinds of
calamities.
>> Mhm. So the calamity of fascism, the
calamity of a return to white supremacy
or sort of um re-rengthening of it, the
calamity of climate change, the calamity
of oligarchy
and instead it's been about
how how much of how bad it will be we
can avert.
Uh I don't think that's the right way to
look at the future, but but I think
there is something to that. But I I
guess because I I get to be on the
podcast with you. Don't you think this
is a bit of a a both sides thing, I have
been really struck by how much the right
also turned backwards in this time? I
mean, like all the way back to
antiquity, right? Bronze Age pervert and
rediscovery of Sparta.
>> We have to return to the step warriors.
Yes, absolutely.
>> There's been something where it feels
like our politics has cast its view
backwards and and in some ways I think
the right has a version of this. it is
we lost touch with who we really are.
And and then the left has a version of
this which is we've never fully
accepted, repented,
um transcended
who we really were.
>> Yeah. I I mean I think that there's no
question that there is a version of what
you might call in internet lingo the
black pill vision of the world on the
right that has been very powerful in
certain ways. Um, I think it's been one
of the key flaws of the Trump
administration and I've I've written
this I think is that it is itself even
in power sort of too pessimistic about
its own situation. It's like oh the you
know the hour is late and if we don't
defeat all of progressivism in the next
6 months you know then then the republic
is doomed. Yeah.
>> Flight 93 it's going down
>> right. No, that that has been that has
been a thread running through the right
um since at the very least since Donald
Trump came down the escalator if not
going back to the crackup of the George
W. Bush presidency. I'm interested
though in it on the left. In part,
honestly, because I feel like I've been
in rooms with liberals and had about
1,200 conversations over the last 10 or
15 years where I have to explain, you
know, what why did the right get so
dark? Um, and so I do want to pin you
down and ask you why you think the left
got dark. But but I also think to me as
an observer, it feels like the
pessimistic turn. You could say, well,
of course it starts when Donald Trump
wins, right? And it starts when populism
emerges. And there's truth to that, but
I also kind of feel like it started a
little bit before that, that there's a a
pessimistic turn starts, you know,
somewhere in 2013 or 2014 under Obama.
Um, that becomes what we call wokeness.
one psychological theory I have of of my
own side.
>> I think that Obama
felt to many people
like some kind of climax of the liberal
project.
If in this country,
four years removed from the flag pin
election of 2004,
we could elect a man named Barack
Hussein Obama,
a black man from Chicago.
then
it everything was possible
that I mean now I think people we we
take Obama so for granted right what
what that was so for granted but it was
incredibly unlikely seeming just a
couple years before it happened like it
seemed way out of the bounds of
possibility
and
we elected Obama or Obama got elected
And
it's not that nothing happened, it's
that what happened disappointed people.
Here you have, you know, the most
talented liberal politician of his
generation wins a big victory and is
actually able to succeed where his
recent predecessors have failed on the
single project that had united left for
decades, which is passing a big
healthcare bill. And even that felt
disappointing.
And after it, it did not solve America's
race problem. It did not mean the end of
systemic racism. It did not mean the end
of police brutality. And it ends in
Donald Trump. And I think that it sort
of shatters liberal optimism. I think
liberalism becomes exhausted and
uncertain after that. What is its next
project? The left, the thing that I
would think of as more like the left of
the liberals, right? The Bernie Sanders
left.
I think that has actually had real
moments of incredible optimism. But I
think liberalism which is the sort of
mainstream of the Democratic party. It
it didn't have an idea after Obama and
the fact that so first Hillary Clinton
is sort of named is seen as a successor
and and she fails in the election quite
catastrophically. Uh and then Biden he
could not articulate what was going to
be next. He was always what had come
before. He was always a shadow of the
thing that had gotten him to that place,
which is the Obama coalition.
And so now there's nothing. There's no
recognized leader of liberalism. There's
no singular project that unites
liberalism. It's not universal
healthcare. Now, I think for a while it
was climate change. I mean, if you're
thinking about existential levels of
pessimism and we're talking in the week
we're talking I think that people's
minds are is not are not now as much on
you know if my inbox and my
conversations are to judge
>> climatic collapse as political collapse
and whether or not there will be an
after to the Trump administration or a
return to something that that they feel
as as more normal. If you're asking me
to sort of give you the
>> No, I I I I buy that. And I think you
could frame it maybe the way you just
did and say, "Look, liberals told the
country and told themselves that the
stakes of the 2024 election were
absolute, right? That, you know,
democracy is on the ballot." And after
you lose an election like that, if you
tell yourself it's existential and you
lose, then it's not even clear how you
return to sort of normal political alarm
in that environment.
I think there's that. I think the loss
of 2024
shattered the Democratic party's
confidence in its own politics. And I
just don't think that the new
leadership, the new ideas have yet
emerged. I mean, one reason I think
abundance did as well as it did as a
book and it created so much energy,
which was more than I thought it was
going to create, is because it it
dropped into a void. Here's the way I am
thinking about where the Democratic
Party is right now. There is a debate
between on the policy side, a liberal
vision of of policym and a populist
version of of policym and power, right?
Is the problem that
we're, you know, the government isn't
able to deliver and our our our
capacity, the state capacity is weakened
or is the problem just that we have
oligarchy and corporate power and if you
could smash that oligarchy and smash a
corporate power, we'd be able to do all
the things we promised people. Right?
Then there's a a split on politics. And
this is the one where
we sort of jumped over, I think, a a
reckoning that's going to have to happen
at some point.
My gloss on what went wrong is two
things. Um, liberalism became a
political movement that didn't deliver
when you elected liberals in different
places, Democrats in different places.
They didn't deliver change in your life.
The outcomes were not good enough. Not
under Biden, not in California under
Gavin Newsome or in, you know, New York
under Andrew Cuomo or, you know, in
Illinois.
But and I think this was actually more
salient in terms of how much power got
seated to the right
>> and and that was ju just to pause on
that first point and I think an
interesting note um that I think you
would agree with right is that that
failure was obscured to some extent by
the fact that the people who experienced
that as failure moved away right so it's
not like liberalism seemed to fail in
these states without losing power right
it's not like California is about to
become republic Republican or New York
State or Illinois, right? It's just that
people moved to other states and so the
problem became sort of invisible to
Democratic leaders in those states who
kept winning elections.
>> Yeah. And I'm not I'm sure it was
invisible to them, but but nevertheless,
I think your your point that a lot of
people who were failed worse by the
growing unaffordability in these states
were were were able to move away. Um but
the other thing is that liberals became
the people who didn't like you.
that they became the people and I've
seen this a lot on the abundance tour
and going on podcasts that you know
people now associate as sort of like the
manosphere and like the the deep sense
that liberals didn't like them. Liberals
became sensorious. They became the
people who knew better than you. This
became very toxic too. And the question
of
what what is the political affect
the Democratic Party in a country where
so many people support something that
most people in the Republican party find
genuinely intolerable almost
unimaginable to embrace is a very
unanswered question. Um and so I think
that's also part of why part of what you
are noting there isn't there isn't a
reigning political theory because the
political theory that people had kind of
failed but no new one and no new
political leader emerged
>> but but I I also think that there's a
way in which I feel like it's gone
beyond a bit what what you describe
right where at sort of the peak of
progressive cultural power at that peak
there was a sense yeah progressives were
sensor torious scolds who didn't like
certainly didn't like populists and
conservatives but seemed to not like a
lot of people generally today. I feel
like it's almost and these are again
impressionistic but it's almost like
>> do progressives like themselves,
right? Like
>> you really want to put him on the couch.
>> Well, well, I I mean I'm I'm
>> But the answer is no.
>> The answer is no. Well, right. No, and
in a way that's always that's always
been true, right? Nothing nothing like a
self-hating liberal, right? Like it's
it's these things where,
you know, maybe people aren't really
postponing kids because of climate
change. Maybe not, but progressives are
having fewer kids. But, you know, 30
years ago, progressives and
conservatives in the Western world had
the same birth rates, and today they
don't, right? 30
>> about the birth rate. No, I'm I'm going
to I'm going to I'm going to add some
other data points besides my perpetual
hobby horses, right? But 30 or 40 years
ago, maybe progressives, you know, if
you looked at sort of statistics on
depression and anxiety and so on, yeah,
maybe progressives looked a little more
neurotic than conservatives. But today,
maybe it's the smartphones, maybe it's
something else, right? Today,
progressives look a lot more anxious and
depressed and neurotic, right? So
there's there's this whole constellation
of things that I just wonder if well, I
wonder two things. one, I wonder if the
even the attempt to sort of figure out a
policy plan, right, is still not getting
down to the bottom of what's a miss
culturally and progressivism. And but
then also I wonder again since we're in
a week when we're talking about
radicalization and violence and so on,
right? I worry about a kind of 1970s
scenario, right? Like again, I don't
think
>> what is the 1970s? 1970 scenario is the
world where um progressives feel like
they lost the country. You know, they
had the 60s and then Richard Nixon took
power and you get a spiral of weirdo
radicalization, weather underground,
days of rage, all these things. And
suddenly you do actually have, you know,
left-wing terrorist movements in
America. That was the last time we had
what I would describe as sort of a
consistently radicalized violent left.
And I don't think we have that right
now. But I worry about it. And I worry
more than I did 6 days ago because
honestly so far what we know about the
motives of Charlie Kirk shooter suggests
that he he fits that category more than
the kind of, you know, unclassifiable
uh radicalized person, but am I just
sort of, you know, am I just a
uh conservative worrying too much? Do
you worry about that kind of
radicalization on the left? I
at the moment I don't um to just be
blunt uh I don't think we're seeing the
emergence of weather underground style
things. Um
>> you're not well you're not seeing
organized I I agree but
>> I look at the violence of the past
couple of years and I see you know the
person who broke into Nancy Pelosy's
home and that was somebody who is kind
of rightcoded in their radicalization.
I look at the person who um shot the
Minnesota former speaker of the house
and a state senator there, Seymour
Wright coded. I my worry right now is a
little bit I think different than yours.
I think we go through periods I think
violence is contagious. I I think the
evidence on this is overwhelming. This
is true at all levels of violence. It's
true for gang violence. It's true for
school shootings. Um violence is
contagious. It is mimemetic in a strange
way. Um, this is why there are groups
that try to enforce a media code not
successfully that we don't name mass
shooters because there is fairly good
evidence in naming mass shooters makes
it more likely. Suicide is contagious.
We know this too. And I am worried that
political violence is becoming
contagious and mimedic. Um, my my friend
uh PJ Vote made this point to me which I
think is true. like we should just not
report on the things written on bullet
casings because after Luigi Manion did
that it was there with this shooter and
this idea where you can make the murder
weapon into a billboard for whatever
message you want the world to hear from
you I think is very bad. So I I am less
seeing this as coded um left or right
and more seeing it as a kind of yeah
mimemetic disease that we go through
periods that it becomes infectious and
I'm very worried about the escalation
into one of those periods now
>> right but the problem with not reporting
on those kind of messages right on it's
like saying well are are we not going to
report on the official stated reasons of
the killers I I Think obviously you have
to and in that reporting you do have to
draw some kind of assessment not just of
like you know why are people you know
getting me'd into violence why why is it
contagious may not be a possible thing
to do
>> but but also like what is what is
actually going on in people's minds
right you know I'm on the record saying
this and I'll say it again I do think
that most of the mass shootings and many
of the political assassinations we have
seen
reflect sort of a mixture of mental
illness, internet radicalization, things
that are not classifiable on partisan
terms. I think you have a set of attacks
and mass shootings that are right-wing
coded and are often connected to
neo-Nazi sort of accelerationist stuff.
We don't know exactly what it looks like
in this case, but it's there in the
Manion assassination, right? That does
seem like a vision that comes out of a
kind of left-wing despair at the state
of American culture or the you know sort
of the impossibility of doing anything
about the oligarchs or the impossibility
about doing anything about the fascist
right except saying here catch fascists
with a bullet right and yeah I'm more
worried about that this week than I was
than I was last week and so I that's
part of why I'm just pushing on
>> on leftwing despair like just to just to
just to take like
>> you know an example from from your own
work right like
>> you do a lot of writing about the idea
that there's an emergency there can be
an emergency in America if Trump you
know defies the Supreme Court or
violates the laws in these in these
various ways um what what do you say to
someone on the left not even someone
who's sort of explicitly considering
violence but someone who says look all
the institutions have just failed. Why
are you here telling me, you know, that
we're going to have a political response
to the emergency? Isn't the hour much
later than that? I think that political
violence of that kind is fundamentally
immoral and catastrophically
ineffective. I don't I don't find this
to be a hard line to hold.
>> No, I don't I don't imagine that you do.
>> And the stakes of politics are almost
always incredibly high. I think they
happen to be higher now. And I do think
a lot of what is happening in terms of
the structure of the system itself is
dangerous. I think that the the the hour
is late in in many ways and that a lot
of the people who embrace alarm don't
embrace what I think obviously follows
from that alarm which is the willingness
to make strategic and political
decisions you find personally
discomforting even though they are
obviously more likely to help you win.
Right? taking political positions
that'll make it more likely to win
Senate seats in Kansas and Ohio and
Missouri. Um trying to open your
coalition to people you didn't want it
open to before running pro-life
Democrats. And one of my biggest
frustrations with many people whose
politics otherwise share is the
unwillingness to match
um the seriousness of your politics to
the seriousness of your alarm. I see a
Democratic party that often just wants
to do nothing differently even though it
is failing like failing in the most
obvious and consequential ways it can
possibly fail. And I am not probably the
person who knows how to do things
differently. Uh I have ideas that are
about abundance and ideas ideas that are
about liberalism and we can talk about
them. But whatever it is,
it shouldn't just be drifting forward.
If you want to talk about to me what
looks to me like despair and pessimism,
it isn't that a couple random people on
both sides, as you note, have picked up
guns.
It is that the people in actual power
who are sane and are clear thinking are
doing almost nothing differently.
They're failing and rethinking nothing
and at least not in any profound level.
And I actually find that very worrying.
I would like to see right now in like
the rooms I am aware of much more
profound forms of restrategizing going
on. So I think that there is a pessimism
but it doesn't
it almost has not hit the level of
despair you're talking about. It's a
kind of like
>> well or maybe it has maybe it's skipped
ahead to to use the classic Simpsons
reference where you say
>> you know uh we've we've we've done
nothing and we're all out of choices or
something. I'm I'm mangling the line,
right? But it's like we've tried nothing
and now it's time it's time to give up.
I want to ask you about about
restructuring in the context of of your
book, but I interrupted you earlier when
you were talking about divides within
the Democrats or divides on the left,
right? And you said one divide is over,
you know, sort of liberalism versus
populism,
but just say something about the other
divide.
>> The other divide I I don't I don't quite
have the right language for it. I don't
want to call it liberalism versus ill-
liberalism. I think that's not quite
right.
I think that there is a liberalism I
would associate with Bill Clinton and
Barack Obama in their political style,
which is a liberalism
that is very attentive
to the reality, the existence of
disagreement
and the need to be not just in
conversation with that disagreement, but
genuinely respectful of it. Bill
Clinton's safe, legal, and rare
formulation.
Barack Obama's approach to questions of
race. But I think that the there's been
a a move um that I think has a lot to do
with social media actually and the modes
of discourse and and uh action that
dominate there. But to begin to have the
view that you don't bridge disagreement,
you sort of draw a line around it and
you say that's not even an okay position
to hold. That there can be no compromise
with it. There can barely be engagement
with it. And
I think that we were illiberal on speech
issues for a number of years there. Like
I think that I should have taken that
critique more seriously than I did at
the time. Um that's one way I have
rethought the period around 2020.
And I think that the
I think that the way in which say
Clinton and Obama um ran politically,
a kind of politics that sat with the
idea that people were absolutely going
to disagree with them and they would
need to win over some of those precise
people. that their politics would need
to be palatable to people who did not
agree with quite a bit of what they
wanted to do. And I think we lost that.
>> And and this gets to uh the thing that
you wrote about Charlie Kirk that uh I
believe has attracted a lot of feedback,
both positive and negative, right? where
you said something to the effect of
while disagreeing with just about
everything Kirk stood for. You felt like
it it had to be emphasized the extent to
which he was doing politics the right
way in the sense that he was famous for
going onto liberalleaning college
campuses and having extended arguments
with ordinary students uh that were for
the most part respectful and serious.
And of course he did many other things
too, you know, but but that was a a core
part of the kind of Kirk identity and
what made him sort of distinctive among
figures. Um and you said basically that
that had to be respected.
Say something about the feedback you've
gotten to that argument. So in I wrote
this piece in the sort of hours right
after Kirk was shot and um as you say I
said look you can disagree with
everything Kirk believed about politics
and believe he was practicing politics
the right way. Now I described in that
paragraph the part of Kirk you're
describing the the part that would go to
colleges and set up a table and
eventually attend and eventually was
auditoriums. She said debate with me
prove me wrong let's talk. Um, there
were a lot of people who took that as
saying I was saying everything Kirk did
politically was the right thing to do
and everything you believed was the
right thing to believe, which is not my
view. But I I hold to the view I did
describe or I think I described, which
is that there was a kind of almost
delight in engagement,
a sense that disagreement could be the
start of something, even if it's only to
disagree for the people on your own
side. that I think the left did not
adopt that uh particular attitude. The
the left is more likely for quite some
time to try to keep someone like Kirk or
Shapiro from speaking on campus
than sort of happily debate with them
and do the reverse which is like can you
do a speaking tour of evangelical
churches, right? Can you can you
actually go into the places you feel are
most hostile to you and treat that as an
interesting place to begin a
conversation even if only to sharpen
your own arguments?
>> Yeah. And I I wanted I wanted to ask you
on exactly that point. Who do you think
that there's anyone on the left who does
that kind of thing? It's sort of part of
it's almost the bunker that
progressivism has built for itself that
it's hard to imagine someone doing that.
I think there has been more of a
tendency to try to define people out of
the community right out of the
boundaries of acceptable or polite
discourse. I think a good quality of
liberalism is a self-doubt about things
where you know you you believe there
should be an erring of ideas because you
believe you could be wrong about things
and even if you're not going to agree
with something totally you might learn
something from it anyway but also
secondarily just an instrumental reality
is it was a total failure and in being a
total failure what it allowed Donald
Trump and the right to do in 2024 was
dramatically expand the shape of their
coalition to RFK Jr. to Elon Musk to the
tech right. Trump 2024 was very
different than Trump 2016.
>> What happened on the right tended to be
that you would have people who had been
on the left who were feeling alienated
who would go and have conversations with
people on the right and would end up
becoming themselves in various ways
rightwing.
>> I just think in many ways we were not
practicing politics. We're doing
something else. But now I'm going to
pull us up from the the meer of
political tactics,
>> okay,
>> to the
>> I think these are political principles.
>> They're political principles, but but
there is a broader vista here, a vista
of, you know, abundance, if you will,
right? And
yeah, I I completely agree with you that
liberalism, progressivism, the Democrats
have all of these sort of concrete kind
of discoursriven flaws, right? they're
sort of failing at the discourse of the
internet era. Um,
but you said earlier, you talked earlier
about the the big challenge that
Democrats have had ever since Obamacare
passed, right, of figuring out what's
next, right? What's what's the horizon?
And I think that that's linked to what I
see as pessimism. Maybe you only see as
uncertainty, disqu, fear of Trump for a
movement that calls itself progressive,
right? There's a lack of utopian
ambition. And when I read your book,
especially at the beginning, I was like,
"This is a utopian book. We're not going
to talk about um the specifics of zoning
reform. I want you to say something
utopian about the future that you think
progressives should build.
>> I believe technology can dramatically
transform human life for the better.
Dramatically. I think it can make
possible ways of living. I think it can
solve problems that we take as
completely inevitable and totally for
granted. I think that we should be able
to deliver dramatic changes to public
infrastructure quickly. I think we
should be able to build things. And I
think when the government promises you
something from highspeed rail to a
subway extension to a national electric
vehicle charger network, that thing
should emerge. It should be gleaming. It
should happen quickly. Should be, oh my
[__] god, the government did that.
And I think that one of the central
failures of progressivism is it has not
admitted it did this, but it has lost
faith in what the government itself can
do and has lost faith in it in part
because it does not let the government
do those things anymore. has wrapped it
in regulation and procedure in ways that
does not allow it to deliver in the way
that our own government has in the past
that other count's governments do right
now. So the the the big dramatic like
ambitious thing I want to say is that
the future does not need to be like the
present and for that we need
institutions capable of delivering and
and and working with change rapidly.
So there's a conservative or libertarian
critique of your argument that says
basically
you can't get what you want through the
means that you want to use to get it
because whatever the government might be
in a hypothetical past in this world
it's too encrusted with interest groups
and their competing demands right and so
to have abundance you need to be more of
a libertarian and yeah You know, you
want the government to do some things,
sure, but mostly it's about deregulation
and unleashing and that you have a sort
of naive faith in government capacity in
this age. I want to stipulate that
argument and not let you address it and
ask you to address a fair way of running
a podcast. I mean, you know, it's it's
my it's my rules and
>> you get to be on that side of the table
today.
>> Well, I No, I just want I I think there
I think you would have reasonable
answers to that. I want to I want to
acknowledge its existence while asking
you while trying to again get down to
this philosophical level which is that
>> I have been around
progressives and liberals my entire life
and I would never describe them
primarily as the part of America that
has great faith in technologies capacity
to change human life for the better.
Quite the reverse. Now, as you
mentioned, some of the people who have
zero faith in technologies ability to
change human life for the better are
sort of crunchy granola antivaccine
types who have migrated maybe into the
Republican tent. Right? So, there is
there is maybe a part of the left that
is anti-tech that is now on the right uh
and in a different political coalition.
But even so, even allowing for that
migration,
my general impression of post 1970s
progressivism, it is is that it is
organized around first a premise that
the most important thing is always
redistribution.
And second, that it just thinks that,
you know, technology is making the world
worse in many ways, right? Um I and I
had Peter Teal on the podcast and he
gave me his sort of familiar, if you
know his work, line about how the
hippies ruined Western civilization by
destroying faith and progress. And
that's an overstatement, but like isn't
there something there? Isn't there a
powerful mindset on the left that just
sort of recoils from your pro technology
spiel?
>> I think some do. I think that one and I
appreciate you drawing this out because
it's part of the book that has gotten
less attention in the tour. People are
more sort of interested in why we didn't
build highspeed rail than this. But very
much an intention of the book for me
explicitly is rebuilding a progressive
politics of technology because I believe
in it because one in some ways it
already happened. Um the book is in part
motivated by the green energy transition
and the green energy transition has been
technologically miraculous. To Peter's
point
uh I I sort of wrote this piece actually
for the times reviewing this book by JT
Hall uh called Where's My Flying Car?
And and Jester Hall is like more I I
would say like the Peter Teal approach
to politics
>> and I call this sort of reactionary
futurism and it has this whole thing
about how the hippies destroyed
everything.
You got to sit with contradiction
sometimes a little bit better than I
feel like some of these arguments do
because of course where is the epicenter
of technological innovation in this
country? It is at the epicenter of the
hippies. That's not some accident,
right?
>> Wait, you're talking about rural
Vermont, I assume. Right.
>> It is partially that culture of intense
openness,
that uh culture of optimism, the the the
willingness to question the way we do
things that has made Silicon Valley
possible. Now I do think the argument
that Teal might make that that Hall
might make that I actually have great
sympathy for is that we have become um
but specifically hypressism has become
excessively riskaverse and harm
reductionist. We are more worried about
what might go wrong than we are willing
to let things go right. And um I think
of that as a pendulum. some of the
backlash to all of this was merited,
that the New Deal growth machine,
because I mean this is hearkening back
to a New Deal form of liberalism, not to
some completely unknown thing. But the
New Deal growth machine really was often
reckless, heedless. We really did cut
highways through all kinds of
communities we shouldn't. We really did
not take people's needs uh into account.
We really did desoil streams and, you
know, cut down forests. There were
reasons we built protections,
protections for individuals, for
communities, for the environment. And
like anything, those things grew and
grew and grew. And then all kinds of
special interests came in and began to
weaponize them. Weaponize them against
new housing development, weaponize them
against new energy development. People
just liked, you know, plenty of very
comfortable people. Many of them
liberals just like the way things were.
They didn't need it to get any better.
They weren't worried about an
affordable, they weren't going to live
in the affordable housing. They were not
suffering from an absence of sufficient
energy or cheap enough energy. And so,
you know, the pendulum has to swing
back. So, it would be one thing if I was
coming in and saying progressivism
should have all these goals it doesn't
have. But I'm saying something actually
quite different. Progressivism has these
goals already. We did try to build
highspeed rail. We just failed. We do
want clean energy, but we are just
failing to build it or were failing to
build it fast enough. So I think for me
I'm trying to reconnect um our ends
which I think many of them are are are
good and wise with our means which have
become insufficient for delivering the
kind of uh policy change or or real life
change that we promise people
>> life change. Let's say something about
that.
You talked about the hippies and the
complexity of the hippies, right? the
idea that, okay, the hippies are in some
way the predecessors of uh, you know,
the environmental review commission that
won't let you build a new apartment
building in a city that needs more
housing. But they're also the
antecedants of Silicon Valley dynamism.
One of the things that I think you see
in,
you know, sort of hippiedom is a kind of
deeply optimistic
vision of the human future. And again,
I'm, you know, containing contradictions
because I was just talking about the
darkness of the 1970s radical left that
also comes out of, you know, c in
certain ways out of hippieom too. It's a
lot of complexity in history. But in
sort of California, California
counterculture politics in the 1970s,
there is also this sort of age of
Aquarius. The world is headed for
consciousness raising and transformation
aspect, a new age metaphysical vision,
not the medical metaphysical vision I,
as a Christian, subscribe to, but a
metaphysical vision nonetheless. And you
knew, you know, you knew I would bring
this conversation around to to religion
at the end, right? But maybe doesn't a
utopia need
that kind of story as well, right? Like
for part of what Obama offered,
you know, was the language of the arc of
history. Is there an arc of history
vision
available to the left that can restore
optimism? Right? like cosmic hope not
just not just hope in technology alone
but hope in the ultimate horizons of the
human species I don't think where the
mains from the democratic party is going
to get its
teological structure of politics is
going to be from the uh hippies age of
Aquarius consciousness raising I don't
think it's going to be at this point
from Christianity or Judaism or or
Buddhism
I do think that there is remarkable
stories contained inside the American
story. And I think that the one of the
damaging things that happened for the
Democratic party was it sort of turned
on its own American story, right? It it
it went from the sort of Obama arc of
history to, you know, the much more like
we are birthed in sin and still inside
of it.
>> Um,
>> which is to to be fair still a story,
right? and still partially true
>> and still but but also a story that you
know you can you can say we were birthed
in sin but we're destined for
redemption. You can imagine a leftwing
politics that says that
>> you know and you can imagine other
stories that are emergent out of what
made mid-century America great. I've
been thinking about this because I've
been a bit obsessed with the speech JD
Vance gave at the Claremont Institute
where a part of the speech was him
taking aim at the sort of creedle
America, the sort of Frederick Douglas
America, the America where belonging is
at least partly defined by a commitment
to the ideals of the Declaration of
Independence. and and Vance says, you
know, that he prefers attaching
belonging to whether your ancestors were
here in the Civil War than whether or
not you believed in the Declaration of
Independence. Um, okay, that's one level
of the fight. And
>> I'm just I'm just going to say I think
that slightly simplifies what he was
saying, but please but please continue.
>> Not really, but we can I would love to
do as long as you want to do on separate
separate episode.
>> But but let me say that he goes on in
that speech to say something else. He
does make a series of points about
citizenship and belonging. He says,
"Well, what's the point of all this?" He
says, "Well, it's to to build, to make
America great, to to to create as our
forefathers once did." And I I read that
and I thought in the period of time in
which America did become this world
spanning colossus. Um, a lot of it did
have to do with our ability to to
integrate people into our community, our
ability to welcome in immigrants, um,
you know, at different rates and at
different times, but quite a lot of
them. um our ability to expand our
community far beyond what other
countries were typically capable of
doing. And it made me think about how
poor we have been um in the Democratic
Party about actually making not just the
moral argument for our approach to
belonging. not just the policy oversight
of our approach to belonging where you
actually do need an orderly border and
for people to feel you're doing things
in the national interest but the actual
argument for at least part of our
approach to belonging which is it it
makes America stronger it makes it more
innovative it makes more generative it
makes it more dynamic and there as being
a lot of opportunity in that there there
being a tradition here that we can take
hold of that is an exciting tradition a
tradition of dynamism a tradition of
change a tradition of welcoming people
in who then do amazing things they could
do here that they could do nowhere else.
So if you want my version of your cosmic
hope, I do think that there's a story in
which America doesn't just bend towards
justice, but it does bend towards a kind
of greatness that comes from uh a kind
of diversity and inclusion. One might
call it
>> fall out of the favor.
>> But in and this is this is my last the
last demand I'll make I'll make of you.
inclusion into what exactly? What view?
What vision of the good life? This is
where I still feel like the utopianism
of your book, while
really good as a corrective to despair,
lacks something that even the right in
its various, you know, sort of dark and
black pill forms still gets to offer,
right? which is that you know the right
can say
you see Charlie Kirk say this over and
over again right in one of the personas
that he had was sort of you know
Christian evangelist and Christian dad
right where he would go around and say
look you know to young men he would say
look you know politics is important but
you have to get married and you have to
go to church and you have to start a
family right that is a concrete vision
of the good life that politics exists to
support and technology exists to enrich,
right? And in mid-century America, mid-
20th century America, it was connected
to a thin but still real sort of
Protestantish
civic religion in which, you know, human
beings had an earthly destiny and a
heavenly destiny too. And it is
impossible for me as a religious person,
I'm sorry, not to look at sort of
progressivism right now and say
you need something else in the horizon
besides saying we're all going to we're
going to be inclusive and we're going to
get rich together with flying cars. You
need to say so that we can live
in some specific way that we are
supposed to live. What is that way? Ezra
Klein, how then shall we live? My
friend, I am a liberal. I actually
believe in creating a space for liberal
individual flourishing of different
kinds. I don't find it to be some great
countercultural thing to say you should
have a family. I have two children. I
talk about it on my show all the time. I
am a left pronatalist. I don't believe
it has been a great advantage of the
rights in politics that some of their
people say it's good to be a dad and nor
do I believe it's a great advantage of
mine. I think that if you want to see
like Obama's good at the politics of a
family and Pete Buddhaj is better at it
than anybody currently on the right
because I think to him it is a more
remarkable thing that he has children
and he has a husband than it is to
anyone virtually in national politics a
whole bud and Obama
>> are both in liberal left-wing
progressive ways steeped in the language
of
>> I think what I'm saying to this is that
I don't think of this as the part of
liberalism right now or the part of the
Democratic party or the left whatever
you want to call it that is unsolved
for.
I don't think that we lack stories. I
don't think we lack that vision. I know
we are not um as rooted in religious
faith as you would prefer us to be. I
think our failures have been elsewhere.
And so abundance is not a book about
everything. I don't really want to tell
you where you got to drive your flying
car. Um, that's not in this particular
spot my role. I actually have ideas that
are we'll see what forms they come out
about what it means to be in a national
community together. I think that's
closer to the kind of thing you're
asking. But I do think
I do think believing in change and
believing in this country is an
adventure is an exciting thing. And yes,
you we we need much more than that to
make meaning out of life. But I think
there's a lot that politics should make
meaning out of. I think it should make
meaning out of us as a nation. I think
it should uh chart a particular course
on policy that is connected to
principles of what we believe is just
and good and decent.
Maybe maybe maybe there is some place we
can get to in politics where it is
capable of doing that. Maybe it is a
John Dwian view of reconnecting us to a
civic culture at such a level of
engagement and involvement here to for
unknown outside of small New Hampshire
villages.
We're far from that.
We're real far from that. I would prefer
something I think getting to somewhere
that is decent, capable, optimistic,
and dynamic would be a good first step.
Ezra, thanks so much for joining me.
>> Thank you, Russ.
[Music]